---
# docs.terminal.ink
# Copyright (C) 2018 Terminal.ink
#
# This file is licenced under the CC-BY-SA-4.0. You should have
# recieved a copy of the licence with this documentation series.
# If not, please read a copy here:
#
# https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/
layout: docs
category: "4.6"
title: 4.6.3 Types of program translator
---

## 4.6.3.1 Types of program translator
Most programming languages can be edited wthin a text editor and/or a dedicated IDE.
However, the text alone is not good enough to be ran.
Computer programs must be processed either by a **compiler** or an **interpreter** in order to execute the code.

### Compiler
A compiler is a computer program which converts code into a binary.
This binary can be ran multiple times, without recalling the compiler.
The resultant file from the compiler can only run on the same computer architecture that it was compiled for, and may be incompatible due to architecture, operating system incompatibilities, etc.
Because a binary is generated, it may take time for the computer program to compile.
After compilation, running the program will take less time.

Examples of compiled languages include:

- Go
- C
- C++

### Interpreter
An interpreter is an intermediate program which reads code line by line, statement by statement and runs the code in real time.
This allows programmers to edit the code in real time without waiting for recompliation.
However, interpreted languages have to have the code distributed with the interpreter.
This may mean the source code could be leaked and stolen by others.
An interpreter can run code on all compatible clients.

Examples of interpreted languages include:

- Python
- JavaScript (Node.js)

### Java?
Java uses a combination of both to merge some of the benefits of each. (While also combining the negatives)

Java uses a compiler to compile java code into java bytecode.
This bytecode is read by an interpreter (The Java Virtual Machine) which processes the bytecode and executes the instructions.
