---
# docs.terminal.ink
# Copyright (C) 2018 Terminal.ink
#
# This file is licenced under the CC-BY-SA-4.0. You should have
# recieved a copy of the licence with this documentation series.
# If not, please read a copy here:
#
# https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/
layout: docs
category: "4.7"
title: 4.7.4 External hardware devices
---

Peripherals are hardware which are plugged into your computer. They are controlled by the CPU.
If the input and output device are integrated into the device, i.e. a smart phone, they are not a peripheral

Peripherals connect to the processor hardware through the motherboard.
External devices will connect via USB, RS-232, Parallel Printer Interface, E-SATA, etc.

Monitors usually connect via VGA, DVI, HDMI or DisplayPort

## 4.7.4.1 Input/Output devices

### Example Input Devices
- Scanner
  - Converts 2D physical images into digital images
- Light Sensor
  - Detects the presence and/or intensity of light
- Touchpad
  - Detects movement of a finger on a flat surface to translate the position of a cursor on a computer
- Web Cam
  - Captures images and/or video
- Remote Control
  - An infrared based wireless input device
- Keyboard
  - An input device for inserting text
- Video Camera
  - Captures images and/or video
- Graphics Tablet
  - A pen based device which translate the position of a cursor on a computer, and which may also record the intensity of the input pressure, which may be used to control brush intensity in an image manipulation program

### Example Output Devices
- Laser Printer
  - Converts digital images and/or text into physical images and/or text by using a heated drum and toner to fuse toner onto a page
- Inkjet Printer
  - Converts digital images and/or text into physical images and/or text using ink
- Dot-Matrix Printer
  - Converts digital text into physical text by pressing onto a special carbon strip to press text onto a page
- Speaker
- Display
- RGB LED
- Buzzer
- Actuator Motor
- Plotter
- CRT Monitor
- 3D Printer

### CMOS
CMOS stands for Complimentary Metal Oxide Semiconductor.
A camera sensor is covered with tiny light-sensitive cells.
The sensor uses a Bayer filter to allow R, G and B colours to be recorded.
Green cells are twice as commonnly found on the filter, as Green is the most sensitive colour in humans.
By using a filter, the camera can interpolate the correct colour for individual pixels.

CMOS chips are not 100% sensor. In fact, most only have 50% of the surface as a sensor. To prevent loss of light, CMOS chips use micromirrors to "funnel" light into the sensor portions of the sensor.

### Embedded Systems
Embedded systems is a part of a larger piece of equipment which are limited to a certain number of tasks, (unlike general desktop computers).
For example, these have computers embedded within them:

- Television
- Washing Machine
- DVD Player
- Digital Camera
- Mobile Phone
- Lift
- Car
- Router
- Network Switch
- Automobile
- Rugged Handheld
- POS systems
- Medical Devices

## 4.7.4.2 Secondary Storage Devices
### Example storage devices

- Optical
  - CD
  - DVD
  - Blu-Ray
- Magnetic
  - VHS
  - Hard Drive
  - Backup Tape Drives
  - Floppy Disk
- Solid State
  - EMMC
  - SD
  - SSD

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/-KRLWGaIunA" frameborder="0" allow="autoplay; encrypted-media" allowfullscreen></iframe>
_Video is copyright LinusMediaGroup_
